---
title: '3 Features That Patients Want From a Medical Website'
url: 2018/02/07/3-features-that-patients-want-from-a-medical-website/
date: Wed, 07 Feb 2018 23:29:48 +0000
keywords : Medical Technology, Healthcare & Government IT
description : It creates a digital handshake – that initial introduction and “hello” to your patients. Working with our proprietary four-step process, at iHealthSpot, we launch new medical website designs that search engines love and look good no matter what device you are using to look at it.
draft: false
tags: [Healthcare IT]
authors : [citrus]
categories : [Healthcare IT]
image : depositphotos_60104315-stock-photo-designer-working-on-laptop-1023x500.jpg
share : 2018/02/07/3-features-that-patients-want-from-a-medical-website/
safeURL : 2018/02/07/3-features-that-patients-want-from-a-medical-website/
---

The way your website looks makes a lasting first impression. It creates a digital handshake – that initial introduction and “hello” to your patients. Working with our proprietary four-step process, at [iHealthSpot](https://www.ihealthspot.com/CustomMedicalWebDesign), we launch new medical website designs that search engines love and look good no matter what device you are using to look at it; whether it be a laptop, tablet or smartphone. Moreover, we design your site with your viewers in mind, making it easy to navigate. We also develop great content with search-friendly keywords that effectively tell your brand’s story. Below, we have a list of three features that your patients want to see on your medical website. **Professional Design and Intuitive Navigation** A medical website design that is easy-to-use and mobile friendly will always win patients over. It takes only a second to realize whether a website is worth your time. A patient came to your website with a goal in mind. They want to navigate your site and achieve that goal effortlessly. You will lose your patients’ interest with an outdated website design and no visual effects. Your patients want to know all they can about the doctor and staff that will be treating them before they waste their time and money going to the office. They want reassurance that you are an expert in your field and will provide the utmost medical care. Showcasing a clean office assures them that the facility is clean, comfortable, and professional. Presenting images of the doctors, staff, and office on your medical website will make your practice memorable to visitors. **Relevant Content** Besides showing the faces of your staff and the cleanliness of your office, the job of your website is to convince the viewer that you’re knowledgeable in your field. Its content proves to your audience that you’re an expert, while also answering basic questions about your office policies and procedures. For example, an article on appointments and what to expect would be a great feature for new patients. We cover all the technical aspects to make sure Google finds your page and ranks your site high on the search results. Keywords, page titles, and credible links embedded in your relevant content index are all aspects of the sites we build. Keywords are words that patients would type into Google to search for what they are looking for, such as the area you serve or your specialty. Page titles help break down your content to make it more scannable for patients to know whether it is the content they are hoping to read. Credible links are links from other websites, doctors, or medical experts that will support what you are saying. The more applicable content and keywords you have, the more likely you are to end up on the first page of search engines. It’s essential to have a fantastic medical website design, but what good will it all do if no one can get in contact with you? Visitors often want information quickly. Give them your contact information repeatedly throughout the site and make it clickable. Have a Google map on your website to show the location and allow them to enlarge it and print it. If you possess the technology to accept text messages in-office, mention that to your audience. Any tactic that will engage in a ‘right now’ response will catch the attention of users. List all insurance providers that your facility accepts and keep the information current. Pinpoint specific guidelines or requirements. Insurance can quickly become a disaster for clients who misunderstand policies. State the methods of payment you accent and the payment procedure. Make it known that you do or do not accept cash, check, or credit cards and if there are any additional fees. As a result, it saves time and prepares patients for their visit. Making commonly-used forms available on your website is a smart decision. Patients can quickly fill these forms out and submit them online or print them to bring into the office. No more sitting in the front lobby for hours thinking about allergies and current medication. **Testimonials** Any potential patient wants to hear first-hand reviews about your care and facility. They want to hear how you treat patients, how you handle difficult situations. Your clients also want to know that you are who you portray yourself to be. Every patient has their own preference of medical needs. Reading quick testimonials or seeing picture-proof will greatly benefit your business and website. The internet redefines the relationship and roles between physicians and patients. A medical website design is your first and possibly only chance, to show your audience who you are. As a medical professional, there are a lot of topics you want to educate your clients on. What you have to realize is that people are more engaged when you present them with visual information.  Our iHealthSpot team has won industry awards for the overall design and functionality of our medical website designs. Our websites consistently generate real results for clients, delivering new patients every month. Check out some of [our best work](https://www.ihealthspot.com/Portfolio.aspx) and talk to an expert about getting started with iHealthSpot.