---
title: 'Hordenine: Your Companion in Weight Loss and Some Weight Management Apps'
date: Mon, 30 Apr 2018 22:06:51 +0000
draft: false
tags: [A. Ahmad, Healthcare, Healthcare IT]
---

Are you someone who has never been able to reach your body weight goals? Well, you are not alone. There are millions of people who are unable to shed off those extra pounds off their body, no matter how much they try. According to a 2017 study, published in Time, obesity now leads to more early preventable deaths in the US than smoking. This has fuelled the growth of the global weight-loss industry, including meal plans, diet pills and gym memberships, which has reached a value of $66.3 billion. Different diets, such as low fat, vegan, low carb and paleo diets, have gained immense popularity in recent times. But several studies have shown that their results can vary according to the individuals. Some people can lose as much a 50 lb, while others end up gaining 5lb. Why is it that after consuming the same kind of food, bodies of different people reacted differently? Every individual has different metabolic levels, which can make fat loss seamless for some, while making it highly daunting for others, irrespective of how much they eat in a day. Higher metabolic levels leads to fat burning at a fast pace, whereas slow metabolism results in our inability to keep our weight under control. What if you are able to boost your metabolism using a brain enhancement supplement with potent ingredients? Let us see what the experts at Smart Pill Guide are saying about [Hordenine in their reviews](http://www.smartpillguide.org/smart-pill-reviews/hordenine/).

How Hordenine can Help
----------------------

Hordenine, chemically written as N,N-dimethyl-4-hydroxyphenylethylamine, is a natural phenethylamine compound, found in many different plants, especially, barley grass. In our daily life, we all experience stress and some sort of depression, which makes it difficult for us to focus at times. This is because of the reduction in dopamine levels in brain The  chemical structure being very similar to the neurochemical tyramine, which assists in the release of hormones such as [and dopamine](https://nootriment.com/serotonin-dopamine), norepinephrine and epinephrine. The compound is popular for its energy boosting abilities. How Does it work? When Hordenine crosses the blood brain barrier, it functions as a monoamine oxidase (MAO B) inhibitor. It then helps in improving nerve communication and balancing hormone levels. This plant alkaloid is stacked with PEA which helps in fighting mental fatigue. The symptoms of any mild form of depression are easily suppressed after consuming this brain booster.

Hordenine in Weight Loss
------------------------

What makes this product different from the others is that fact that this powerful hormone regulator increases cellular metabolism not only to enhance mental focus but to promote fat burning as well. Hordenine helps in the breakdown of fatty acids. It boosts the metabolic rate and also slows down the digestion and the tendency of the human body of gastric emptying. As a result the person’s appetite is significantly lowered. At the same time, Hordenine balances the output of the adrenal glands, whichm as a result, produces an intense sense of drive and motivation, while improving mood. This motivation, along with the increased levels of mental focus and energy, works well when trying to burn calories in a gym. Do know that the excess dosage of Hordenine can increase blood pressure via vasoconstriction, restricting the passage of blood flow, which are cautioned as one of the side effects. It is thus advised to consult a doctor regarding the dosage before taking the pills. Hordenine is a preferable choice of many fitness enthusiasts and professionals. Do give it a try and see the results for yourself. Technology is nearly touching every aspect of our lives, and weight loss and management is no exception. Check [this article](https://www.healthcareguys.com/newscenter/best-weight-management-apps/) for some weight management apps suggestions.