---
title: 'How to Let Go of Self-Limiting Beliefs'
date: Thu, 07 Jun 2018 23:31:32 +0000
draft: false
tags: [A. Ahmad, General]
---

Do you tend to focus on what others think of you instead of what you think of yourself? This could be what is getting in the way of you achieving your goals. According to research by [the University of Scranton](http://www.scranton.edu/), 92% of the people don’t achieve their goals. The reason most people do not succeed in achieving their goals is that they do not set specific and challenging goals. Not having clarity around the goals and not challenging yourself enough minimizes the chances of hitting the mark, preventing us from being as successful as we could be. The reason most people aren’t motivated to hit their gaols is because they feel they aren’t capable. Most of these thoughts are fuelled by others’ opinions of us, leading to self-limiting beliefs about ourselves and our self identity. Some of us might get so affected by these self-limiting beliefs that they build walls around themselves to protect themselves against what others think of them, says Dr. Meghana Dikshit, [an expert in depression counselling in Mumbai](http://www.drmeghanadikshit.com/). The problem is that these beliefs tend to stick because of a psychological principle called belief perseverance. Dr. Dikshit advices people not to take other’s opinions personally. They are going through their own life experience and you are experiencing yours. What others do or say projects their own reality, not yours. Here are four ways you can get rid of self-limiting beliefs. **1\. Dare, Dare, Dare** Have you ever felt the urge to ask a question in a conference but resisted, fearing what people might think of your question? Well, it is time to dare yourself to be a rebel. Stand up for what you believe in. Do what you want to do, instead of doing what people want you to do. Dare to dream and to work to achieve those dreams. **2\. Exercise** Did you know that lifting weights has been found to lower anxiety? Regular exercise not only keeps us fit and but boosts our confidence too. Exercise is also found to be effective in treating depression and anxiety. Exercise releases feel-good chemicals in the brain, like dopamine and endorphins. These chemicals help in regulating stress hormones like cortisol and adrenaline. As a result, we feel more positive and motivated. **3\. Recognize Thoughts Patterns** Do you tend to have negative thoughts about yourself or your abilities? Take out time to recognize your predominant thought patterns. A good way to do so is to write them down in a journal. Being aware of your thoughts can help you minimize the negative thoughts and amplify the positive ones. This is another useful step towards detecting and treating anxiety and depression. **4\. Stop Listening to the Negative Voices** All of us have a chorus of negative voices residing in our head. However, these critical voices, if left unchecked, can take charge of our lives and trap us in mental and behavioural prisons that cause a never-ending spiral of negativity. We need to learn to replace these voices with voices that motivate and spur us forward. Always remember, self-limiting beliefs are your own thoughts limiting you from being the best version of yourself. It is at times difficult to fight them on your own. This is where the top psychologist, such as those in Mumbai, can help.