---
title: 'Look After Your Smile in 4 Easy Steps and Some Useful Apps'
date: Wed, 27 Jun 2018 02:44:56 +0000
draft: false
tags: [A. Ahmad, Healthcare, The Healthcare Guys]
---

Nobody can honestly say that they enjoy those trips to the dentist, but they are part and parcel of modern life. However, that isn’t to say that we can’t do something to make them less of an issue. By looking after your teeth, you can keep them for the whole of your life and also minimise the pain and discomfort that we associate with poor dental hygiene. This short article offers 4 proven tips that will ensure that your smile stays just as beautiful as it is today. **Brushing** Okay, this may seem to be a no brainer, but you would be surprised to learn how many of us simply do not brush our teeth often enough. You need to be doing this twice a day and that means morning and evening. Spend two minutes brushing your teeth and use an electric brush whenever possible. Manual brushes are fine but ensure that you put in the extra effort required. Always replace the brush, or brush heads, when they start to show signs of wear and tear and choose the one that suits you best. If in doubt, speak to your dentist for advice as to which one is the most suitable. **Flossing** This is another habit that seems to have fallen by the wayside for many of us and that is a real shame. Flossing removes the food particles that lodge between your teeth and brushing sometimes misses these altogether. There are a variety of floss products available and you can usually find the one that suits your teeth the best. Ask your dentist for technique assistance and try to do this directly after brushing your teeth. **Cause and effects** Not only should you be spending time brushing and flossing your teeth, you should also do your best to ensure they stay n good condition. This includes watching what you eat and drink and that includes sugary foods and other harmful activities such as smoking and drinking alcohol. The stains can be removed but the lasting damage caused by these products will eventually take effect. Smoking itself is connected to gum disease and this is one of the biggest causes of tooth decay around the world. **Dentist** The next time you think twice about visiting [Summit Heights Dental Clinic](https://www.summitheightsdental.com/) in North York, remember that these health professionals really are your friends. Keep those appointments every 6 months and let your dentist know if you have any issues. They can often give free advice about how to keep those pearly whites in good shape and can help to care for them before anything serious happens. Your dentist is trained to recognise these potential problems well in advance and it is a proven fact that many health issues begin in our mouths. If you need any information about looking after your teeth and gums, you only have to ask. **Useful Apps** Technology is nearly touching every aspect of our lives, and dentistry is no exception. Below is a list of some useful apps that you can use for your dental care: [Brushing and whitening teeth](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.PerfectTeeth32.english) [QuickBrush - toothbrush timer](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.samynakayamadriss.samydriss.quickbrush) [Oral and dental : diseases and treatments](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.DEVproAPP.Oralanddental) 4 awesome tips that will keep you smiling and who knows, you may even enjoy those trips to the dentist one day?