---
title: 'Medical Devices Every Senior Needs'
date: Thu, 31 May 2018 18:09:11 +0000
draft: false
tags: [A. Ahmad, Medical device]
---

Technology has made incredible advances in how it improves the way we live: The whole point behind technology is to make life more convenient, and this means that the medical sector is part of this. Here are some medical devices that every senior needs to have if they want to make their life just a little bit easier with the [help of some great technology](https://money.usnews.com/money/retirement/articles/2015/11/16/10-essential-tech-tools-for-older-adults). **A Smartphone** Most people don’t think of a smartphone as a medical device, but with a couple adaptations and the right apps installed on it, it can quickly become one of the greatest health aids that you have at your disposal. For example, there are many apps which will remind you when to take your medication – and which medication to take; there are also apps that will put you in touch with a doctor when you need to find out if a symptom warrants further investigation by your medical professional. A smartphone is hugely useful when used right. **A Nebulizer** Most people live through their whole lives without having even the slightest sign of developing lung trouble – and then suddenly when they get older, they realize that their lungs are no longer able to keep up. This leads to symptoms like a cough that just doesn’t go away, wheezing and it could even lead to sudden lung disease – especially if you live in an area that has a high level of pollution, or you spent half of your life being a smoker. A nebulizer delivers ampoules of medication directly to the lungs in an aerated form – and can be a huge help if you are struggling with your lungs. **A Blood Pressure Monitor** Even if you have never had problems with high blood pressure before, you should have a blood pressure monitor handy – even without chronic blood pressure issues, your blood pressure might still go too high or too low on occasion. And if you want to avoid further trouble with your health, then a blood pressure monitor is a good way to watch out for the signs at home. It could very well save your life if you were at risk of a heart attack or stroke. **A Sleep Monitor** There are several kinds of sleep monitors, and these days they even come in the form of apps that will keep an eye on you throughout the night: These are great if you are suddenly [struggling with your sleeping patterns](https://www.webmd.com/sleep-disorders/features/reset-sleep-cycle), you start snoring or you notice that you have been struggling with sleep apnea. These aren’t expensive to keep around, and they can be lifesaving when the need for them arises and there is nobody around to keep an eye on you while you sleep. **A Medic Alert Device** You should never think that an emergency will never happen to you – it is unfortunately inevitable, especially as you get older. What will happen if you feel the signs of a heart attack or stroke coming on and there is nobody around to take you to hospital? What happens if you fall and you are unable to reach the phone or panic button? A medic alert device could very well be the thing that saves your life if such an emergency were to ever happen. It keeps an eye on vital signs like your heart rate and blood pressure, and it’s set up to alert your emergency contacts and emergency services if you are in the danger zone – this makes it better than traditional panic button options, especially because you would not need to press it in order to make it work. There are plenty of sites for [reviewing devices](https://www.medicalalertbuyersguide.org/medical-alert-reviews/) and finding out which is the best quality medical device for you.