---
title: 'Nationwide Health Training Debuts ACLS, BLS, and PALS Certification Courses'
date: Fri, 09 Feb 2018 22:43:04 +0000
draft: false
tags: [A. Ahmad, Press Release, The Healthcare Guys]
---

_Online CPR Program Extends to Include Medical Training Classes_

**Seattle, Washington:** Nationwide Health Training launches new ACLS, BLS, and PALS certification training courses online for health professionals in all fifty states. All three courses will introduce advanced medical training to health professionals- such as doctors, nurses, and paramedics- that care for and manage patients during cardiovascular emergencies. The (ACLS) Advanced Life Support course will teach you how to provide care during cardiovascular and respiratory emergencies and will include ACLS algorithms, team dynamics, identifying and managing different types of emergency situations. The (PALS) Pediatric Advanced Life Support course provides training on how to care for infants or children during cardiovascular medical emergencies. The (BLS) Basic Life Support course will teach you how to perform high-level CPR training, single-person and team rescuer guidelines, and protocol in and out of hospital care. Finding the time to complete a certification or renewal course can be stressful. These comprehensive online training courses, however, were designed to eliminate that problem as well as the hassle of traditional in-person classes. All classes are accessible 24 hours a day allowing the student to learn at a pace that works best for them. Once enrolled, students will receive study guide materials, a provider manual, and an exam created by certified AHA physicians using the most current 2015 guidelines. With Nationwide Health Training, you can earn your ACLS, BLS, and/or PALS certification following these three simple steps:  **• Step 1** – Select the course(s) of your choice and get instant access to begin. (Only 2-3 hours to complete.) **• Step 2** – Take the Certification or Recertification Exam. (Receive test results immediately). **• Step 3** – Once you pass the exam, you’ll be able to print a digital copy of your certification card. The hard copy will be mailed to you within 3-5 days.  **About the Company:** Nationwide Health Training provides online CPR/AED, First Aid, ACLS, BLS, and PALS certification and re-certification courses to both health professionals and working professionals in all 50 states. With decades of experience in CPR course development, Nationwide Health Training strategically designed their courses in accordance with American Heart Association guidelines and ECC guidelines set forth by the AHA. **Nationwide Health Training                                     ** **P.O. Box 40157 Bellevue, WA 98015         ** **(866)-672-2235** **www.cprcertificationcourses.com**