---
title: 'The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Healthcare'
date: Tue, 27 Mar 2018 19:35:15 +0000
draft: false
tags: [A. Ahmad, Artificial Intelligence]
---

Research shows that there is an increase of chronic diseases globally. In case of an outbreak of an infectious disease like Ebola, there is usually a rapid spread throughout the entire world. We must find ways of handling the quick spread of outbreaks to reduce the number of people who might contract the disease. In recent years, researchers have made advancements in detecting and diagnosing of chronic diseases, thus reducing overall treatment costs. New technologies like cell biology, genomics, organ therapy, and proteomics have also greatly contributed to the timely handling of chronic diseases. Just like in the health sector, there have been technological advancements in the bodybuilding industry with the creation of top anabolic steroids for muscle growth. You can buy these steroids online at [120 kilos](https://120kgs.com/). Artificial intelligence is certainly impacting the healthcare sector positively.

The role of artificial intelligence in healthcare
-------------------------------------------------

**1\. Virtual health assistants** Virtual health assistants are actively helping patients in numerous ways. For instance, they can help dementia patients keep track of their prescribed medicines by sending them reminders. Alternatively, virtual health assistants provide advice on treatments of common diseases or even give recipes to patients who have some diet restrictions. Patients can also be monitored using data by the aid of virtual health assistants. It allows for engagement between patients and pharmacies, providing reminders for prescription refills and pickups. They can even go to the extent of recommending preventative health screening. **2\. Diagnosis** Artificial intelligence is used to enhance medical diagnosis. For instance, medical image diagnosis is only possible with the aid of artificial intelligence. Radiation technology has been widely applied to improve CT scans and X-rays. This technology goes as far as detecting any suspicious lesions in patients suffering from lung cancer. This enables doctors to provide diagnosis earlier instead of having tissue samples taken to the lab for analysis. This means treatment can be given earlier before the disease reaches an advanced stage. Some researchers have also come up with an artificial intelligence algorithm which can detect and diagnose skin cancer. **3\. Healthcare chatbots** Bots for healthcare are usually created for the sole purpose of having an engagement, or rather, communication with patients. These bots offer a big advantage as they can be found in mobile apps, and hence are easily accessible. They help patients send messages in real-time and quickly. They can also help with responding to queries related to health. Some aid patients manage medications by giving information on required medications and their doses. Bots can also perform natural language processing, sentiment analysis, and convert concept mining to chat scripts. **4\. Treatment advancements** Artificial intelligence is enabling advancements in treatments by improving treatment plans organization, data analysis to come up with effective treatment plans, and also close monitoring of treatments. It possesses the ability of fast identification of diseases through recognition of signs in medical images. This enables quick diagnosis, thus bringing down the time patients sometimes waste waiting for diagnosis results. With this, treatments can also be administered earlier.