---
title: 'Why is Dental Digital Health Technology More Advanced Than Other Healthcare Specialties?'
date: Thu, 29 Mar 2018 19:29:02 +0000
draft: false
tags: [A. Ahmad, Dental IT, Dentistry]
---

Technology has helped achieve unimaginable feats in the field of health and medicine. Hi-tech equipment and cutting-edge techniques are helping doctors and healthcare specialists make stunning medical breakthroughs every day. While these advancements are being observed in all perspectives of healthcare, its highest benefactor seems to be the dental department. Dentistry has developed like no other area of medicine in the last decade. If you wake up in the middle of the night with a sensitive tooth problem, the issue can be permanently resolved during the (same) day That kind of superfast prognosis and diagnosis is, however, either non-existent or extremely rare for other problematic diseases. You could say the same about even some of the most minor health issues. [Dental digital health technology is progressing](https://www.healthcareguys.com/2017/01/24/5-ways-technology-is-changing-dentistry/) at a glorifying rate and is transforming dental care from being complex and painful to simple and painless procedure.

What makes digital dentistry outpace other healthcare specialties
-----------------------------------------------------------------

**Advanced equipment and disruptive innovations** In June 2015, Nobel Biocare, one of world’s leading dental treatment facilities performed the first dental surgery with the aid of virtual reality (VR). That was just one out of the many examples of how digital dentistry is surpassing other fields of medicine. From intraoral camera (that lets one see every portion of your teeth and mouth with incredible detail) to 3D printers (that manufactures a cap or an entire tooth in moment’s time), disruptive technologies are ensuring that dental treatments translate nothing near to a major health disease. This is one of the things other healthcare specialties need to learn from dentistry - simplify treatments! **Shorter duration of treatments** What would you do if there was a mole on your face or a birthmark? Such little blemishes might prevent you from looking your best, but how often will you consider treatment? Rarely! Even some of the simplest surgical procedures like these tend to be time-consuming and require several sessions to achieve expected results. Now consider this: you are unhappy with your smile, which could be due to misalignment, uneven shape, gaps, or discoloration of your teeth. You consult your doctor and s/he suggests porcelain veneer, a dental treatment that helps improve the appearance of human teeth. The treatment requires creation of custom-made (wafer-thin) shells that will be permanently cemented to the visible portion of your tooth. Dental veneers are prepared after a series of different processes like cleaning, polishing, etching, enamel removal, etc. As complex as the treatment sounds, it can be easily carried out in only 2 sessions. In case you are looking for porcelain veneer or other dental treatments, [Ritter and Ramsey General and Cosmetic Dentistry](https://www.ritterandramsey.com/porcelain-veneers/) are a reliable, highly professional resource. Similarly, there are several other major dental treatments that conclude in just one or two sessions, thanks to the availability of innovative techniques and experienced practitioners. Summing up, future of dentistry looks brighter in comparison to other medical specialties. This digital revolution that is transforming dental health and hygiene must positively inspire other fields of medicine to update with it simultaneously.